[Music]
managing our emotions is maybe a
short-term solution sometimes but it's
really not a good long-term one and that
feeling our emotions really actually
brings us the freedom and the joy that
we want
welcome to the art of accomplishment
where we explore how deepening
connection with ourselves and others
leads to creating the life we want with
enjoyment and ease I'm Brett Kistler
here today with my co-host Joe Hudson
[Music]
today I'm really excited to start a
series that we're going to do on
emotions and I've been wanting to do
this for a long time and I'm very
excited for it and for this first
episode to kind of kick off this series
I want to go into the process of
emotional development that we all go
through as we start to work through each
of the emotions that we're going to
discuss in the series
so Joe I'd love to just start with how
do you see the process of emotional
development in the work that you've been
doing I do think that there's some
pretty
clear steps of emotional development I
think what's interesting to me before we
even get into that is that you know I've
been a student of human development a
lot you know from Terry o'fallen's work
to the integral work to
um you know earlier stuff like Piaget
and and all and
and I think that almost all of that
development work has been done around
the intellect and very little has been
done around
the emotions and so I've looked quite a
bit to look for like what I think are
coherent emotional development
um steps and I and I have a really hard
time finding them and I think
some degree is that people who move more
from their emotional experience they're
not intellectual writers so they don't
write it down and vice versa so I think
that that's where a lot of the work is
fall short I also I just might not have
found it yet
um
so I just want to start with that but
but what's interesting to me is that the
the emotional development cycle as I see
it is very very similar to a lot of the
cognitive development in the way that
it's it feels circular on some level I I
kind of feel like it's like a spiral so
when you're at the top of the Spiral
it feels like it's circular but you've
actually made progress it's something to
that effect so the beginning and the end
feel very similar there also seems to be
a unifying thing that happens in the
developmental cycle where
like in cognitive development
the sense of self unifies or the sense
of time unifies there's an emotional
unification I think that also happens on
the emotional development side
and there's also something about it's
not just like a grand cycle there's a
it's like lots of little iterations to
get there right that you're you're kind
of going back and forth you're
pendulating through the cycle through
the growth development and all those
things seem to be really similar for
emotions but you ask the question so
I'll answer uh what are the stage of the
of the emotional
development in in my mind what I what I
would say is that you're first you're an
infant and emotions are fluid and
they're non-personal like an infant can
cry
for three hours straight if they have
colic and they don't wear out their
throat right they just literally there's
no contraction around it there's no I
shouldn't be crying you see humans cry
and they're like oh all right and you
see babies crying they're like
the whole emotional openness is compared
to constriction around the tears
so that's kind of the very non-personal
very fluid
and then emotions were taught to take
them personally and were taught either
just by cognitive development and or
just by the nature of the way that all
of us are raised we're taught to repress
the emotions and I'll make a distinction
between repression means hey don't feel
that emotion
and management which will come later but
it's literally something where we are
told
um it's not okay to feel sad it's not
okay to be angry it's not okay to be
scared it's not okay to be jealous
whatever the emotional experiences we're
we're told that
and and we're told it either by being
punished for it or being bribed out of
it or it's just maybe so hardcore in our
own system we just are like oh no no no
no no I'm not gonna feel that and then
with that there's kind of musk muscular
constraints that come with it or then
the emotions start to control us like
that we have these experiences these big
emotional experiences I can't believe I
said that when I was angry or like I
lost control or blah blah blah
and that's kind of where the world says
that's what emotions are they don't ever
emotions never really get out of that
for most people most languages emotions
are there they're they're creating
disruption and they need to be managed
you know apparently to make good
decisions which is complete hogwash when
you look at the Neuroscience or so that
I can manage myself control myself and
then we start to try to manage the
emotions which is a form of repression
but there's an intellectual component to
it where we're actively deciding that
emotions aren't good and we're going to
manage them by running a lot or we're
going to manage them by
telling ourselves that we're not going
to be emotional we're going to manage
them by ignoring them we're gonna
you know repress them in in a way that
has more intellect to it it's not like a
body repression which is the distinction
I'm making there and meditation by the
way can be that it doesn't have to be
that but ADI ashanta who I who I adore
his work and he basically at one point
said
um
most people meditation is management and
that's torture okay something to that
effect so it's like even meditation can
be a way to manage the emotions instead
of allow and feel the emotions
which is the next step then we start to
allow the emotions we'll feel the
emotions and we'll start expressing
those emotions in a way that isn't at
anybody isn't manipulative isn't part of
a power over struggle with somebody
and then we'll usually do anger and
sadness first then probably fear and
then joy and Bliss peace all that stuff
starts coming and this is where the meat
of the work is and for some people some
emotions are easier than others usually
the negative emotions almost always
not even sure if I've seen a case where
it hasn't been the case the negative
emotions need to move first and then the
positive emotions
oftentimes people don't understand that
they're repressing the positive emotions
and you're referring to negative and
positive as the like the context in
which we come to understand them through
our repression correct that's right yeah
yeah what society would say sadness fear
and anger were the negative ones and
Bliss and
deep love
joy that kind of stuff that's called the
positive ones and or like really excited
for instance is another one and
yeah you get to a point where neither
are positive or negative for sure
um but in that developmental process
it's coming it's allowing the negative
ones to move that then bring the
positive ones up and then the positive
ones often have as much if not more
resistance
so then there's that
and then all the emotions are fluid
again and somewhere in there they become
non-personal
again so you don't believe the stories
behind the emotions they're true
partially true or not true but they're
not the truth and you don't believe the
emotions is true
then the emotions start to become you
know in an art of accomplishment I think
one guy said it's like now all my
sadness is wrapped in love
and another story I remember somebody
talked about it
and she said
I was doing the enjoyment exercise that
we have and which is you know enjoy
yourself 10 more and she was trying she
was crying and she's like oh I can enjoy
this 10 more and then all of a sudden
that that experience of Joy combined
with the emotion
starts to happen and that just becomes
more and more like a unified thing where
the this the distinction between the
emotions fade away
so that's that's the developmental that
I've experienced that's the
developmental course of the emotions
yeah yeah and that illustrates how it
comes back around to sort of the
beginning you know to kind of summarize
what you've described it starts out
you're you know you're a baby nothing
has happened to you yet you're just a
blank slate and the emotions are fluid
non-personal is just a process happening
in your body it's your body adjusting
you know neural networks adjusting their
weights hormones shifting to match
whatever's going on in your world and
then you start to get shaped certain
emotions make people uncomfortable those
are repressed
consequences start happening to you so
then emotions that you have start
getting linked to stories of what's
going to happen to you so then you know
naturally we just start to shape our
Behavior based on avoiding those stories
and it makes sense because those stories
were learned in the way that
you know the world actually was
responding to our emotions and we had no
power at that time so that's the only
thing you really can do and then that's
that's a place where people end up
staying often it's just they'll live
their life
based on the emotional context that
they've learned with the particular
pattern of repression that they've
learned yeah just to talk on that for a
subject if you go out and you read
emotional literature it wasn't until
recently that there was this idea of
emotional intelligence to even
understand them and the the emotions
might have some wisdom to them and they
have a tremendous amount of wisdom and
they are the cause of our
decision-making process
but most of it is about managing
emotions most of the literature most of
the self-help stuff out there is like
how to be in control of your emotions
right which seems like the next stage if
we start to recognize that stage three
is happening where emotions are
controlling us I think the first
instinct is to try to try to control
them right back that's right you're
getting a power struggle with your
emotions that's right yeah which which
is uh it's an attempt to break free of
that structure and that patterning but
it's also a internal war with ourselves
we are creating new impulses to fight
the initial impulses that are coming up
within us and you can get into a stable
state with that and manage your emotions
all the way through your life and have a
story that that's actually helping yeah
I mean stable yeah yeah yeah that was a
stable ish yeah yeah you could continue
to be in this stage for the rest of your
life and it'll be meta stable in some
way yes and so then the the next thing
you that I heard you mention was this
stage Beyond where maybe maybe this is
where the stability breaks down in the
management and you realize that it just
doesn't actually work or maybe a
heartbreak happens just some tragedy
occurs and
something brings up emotions that are so
powerful that you are unable to control
them and they actually move through you
despite your best attempts at preventing
them and you might recognize that this
actually has a positive impact on your
life some kind of maybe post-traumatic
growth event the thing that propels
people into that stage sometimes it's
big emotions that they can't control and
then they find relief when they allow it
to flow
sometimes it's
I control my emotions but I'm not happy
I notice that all the joys out of my
life there's no like I can't play
anymore I don't I don't have joy anymore
and so a lot of the people when I'll
talk to them I'm like that's because all
your emotions are repressed or that
saying that I have of
Joy is a matriarch of a family of
emotions she won't come into your house
unless her children are welcome that
resonates with people because there's
something in us that knows that we need
to allow all the emotions for joy to be
there and so that also motivates people
to get to
allowing the emotional experiences yeah
so that we reached this stage where we
start to recognize that managing our
emotions is maybe a short-term solution
sometimes but it's really not a good
long-term one and that feeling our
emotions really actually brings us the
freedom and the joy that we want and
this then becomes a journey yeah there's
kind of a transition there to when you
are when you are living your patterns to
when you are on the path of some sort so
there's a distinction in this as well
and that that distinction is interesting
to me because
there's forms of meditation that say you
know feel your emotions and observe the
emotions and so there's and I'm not
saying that that's bad I think that's
actually really a great thing
there's also having the emotions
expressed and move through your body and
that's an incredibly critical piece of
it because the emotional repression is
held in our muscles
you can see when you hold an emotion
back whatever it is you have to
constrain a muscle and so the muscles
aren't going to learn from just sitting
in meditation position and allowing
yourself to feel the emotion though
that's incredibly helpful
there is a need for the emotion to
actually move your body to allow it to
to move your body and move through your
body yeah it sounds like part of that
distinction is that if you if you go
through this process of observing your
emotions
and not feeling them by having your
muscles exhibit some kind of cathartic
release
then you might find yourself less
controlled by the emotions you might be
developing a technique to distance
yourself from them but you're not
actually accessing the wisdom of them
either
and you could still kind of stay off
track and also feel disconnected from
your joy yeah I would say not as deeply
right I think there's benefit to it for
sure I I did it for years I still do it
I love it and there's there's J we're
human we need to go to the bathroom and
we need to cry it's just how we are as
people and so yeah moving those
emotionals
States through the system is if it's not
critical it's definitely something that
expedites the whole damn thing so yeah
and this is where some of that Corkscrew
wrapped back around to the beginning
because when we're actually doing this
you look at somebody as you know Society
might think of the adult way to handle
any motion is just to maybe close your
eyes
nobody sees anything happen and then you
open them again and you continue with
your day right and the way people would
associate a baby's emotions are
and a lot of the the actually feeling
them fully through our muscles and
having that cathartic release though
describing actually starts to look a lot
more like we're returning to sort of the
baby state where
all of our emotions are welcomed and
fluid but there's a there's a new layer
of the context now which isn't just our
emotions are fluid and non-personal
because we don't have any other way of
being it's our emotions are fluid and
non-personal and we still know how they
had been repressed we still know what
kind of consequences can happen to us in
society by expressing certain emotions
in certain ways and we have this
appetite for
regardless of what society says or does
that our emotions are welcome and We
Know It And we feel it in our body and
when that happens this like seventh
stage that you mentioned is that they
all become wrapped in love Yeah and
become indistinguishable yeah yeah it
becomes really hard to know like the
emotions are so fluids really it's just
like
it's just a movement that moves through
you
and it and yeah so hard to to feel
the distinction between
joy and sadness or excitement and fear
or
all of them actually is where it comes
down to yeah I think that's a very
relevant uh kind of piece to hold in in
Consciousness as we go into this series
because we're going to be talking about
individual emotions by name and to
recognize that this is you know these
names are sort of the way that society
and culture has clustered these physical
experiences and named them and
Associated them with certain patterns
and certain consequences and
acceptance or denial or good or bad or
positive or negative and what I would
say there is that the the idea of most
of the emotions that are out there in
the world are the way the emotion
presents if it's if it's resisted
so
people don't want to feel certain
emotions because for good reason because
they hurt right but but what you find
out through this process is it's not the
emotion that hurts it's the resistance
to feeling the emotion that hurts it's
not like I I hate to use it again but
it's not like going to the bathroom
hurts but if you're resisting going to
the bathroom that's going to hurt and so
it's a very similar thing it's the
clogging of the pipe that's that hurts
and when you unclog the pipe it it just
becomes more and more enjoyable right
through the whole process yeah and I
think something that's interesting to
recognize also is that when we when we
go through these
through these later stages of emotional
development we start welcoming various
emotions you know we might start calling
them by by name and be like okay you
know what I need to feel right now I
need to feel anger and then you feel the
anger but then something else kind of
happens like I've had this experience
where as I'm just getting into an anger
release I'll start and I'm not really
feeling it and then I'll kind of find
myself getting carried away into it and
then like at the very end of it my voice
will crack in pain and it's like oh like
it was actually sadness under there but
really it was just a gradient of
different emotion just moving through
this rainbow of feeling yes and this
like as this comes back around to the
beginning of this cycle it really just
everything sort of fuses back together
and it's just my body is going to make
whatever my whatever movement it needs
to make right now and I trust that I'm
going to become a reorganized
reorganized human at the end of this and
I don't need to even have a story for
what emotion it was that's right that's
exactly it
so yeah that's the way it moves and and
just generally that's the developmental
process you've you've recapped it really
well so Okay so we've got this we've got
this process and there's ways that we
can get stuck in it and one of the
things that you just described earlier
is that it's it's not a single cycle you
kind of you find yourself spiraling
around the cycle a number of times and
you we might be patterned to get stuck
in this management of our emotion stage
and then we start to recognize more and
more subtle ways that we're managing and
sometimes the ways that we thought we
were letting our emotions flow are
actually managing you know we're aiming
for an anger catharsis and we're using
that to avoid our hurt something like
that
or we're naming our emotion as a way to
not feel our emotion though when we
first started naming our emotions they
were a way to feel our emotions right so
each Epiphany becomes the next rut yeah
exactly that's right so I guess a
question then is as we're going through
this process and we're we're doing this
we're on this emotional development path
how do we recognize when it's actually
working for us is there what are the
signs that we can look for what kind of
impact does it have on our decision
making or on our cognitive development
how do you know when it's working let's
just start there
um
if you're going to start feeling more
joy you're going to start feeling more
love even if they're uncomfortable
that's going to start happening more
there's going to be a feeling of more
aliveness like it's some people describe
it as energetic release and I think
that's a fine description of it it's
also it seems like it's like the
musculature that you have been holding
to prevent yourself from feeling that
gets released and therefore there's less
tension there's less effort required in
a moment-to-moment basis so you're going
to feel that happening
um there's going to be moments but not a
lot of them where you feel potentially
lost in the emotion and each of the
emotions has their own story as to why
you can't feel them but you're going to
potentially feel lost in it and you know
that you're believing the story when
that's happening
sometimes you'll go through something
where you're circling on the same
emotion over and over and over again and
if you're not dealing with an old trauma
that you're healing over time
that we
Recreation of the emotion means that
there's an emotion underneath that
you're not feeling
but in general it's just going to create
a lot more peace and a lot more joy in
your life and a lot more fluidity and
connection
and you'll know it and it won't take
long it won't take long I mean people
after their first angry release are
usually like holy crap but like
they just feel so much
not always sometimes it takes 10 but
yeah it doesn't take more than 10. yeah
okay so as we're as we're kind of
watching you know we're going through
this process where
we're on this path of emotional
development we're looking for certain
signs to see how this is showing up in
our life am I feeling more joy for
example and how how can we tell the
difference between like being open to
and wondering in in wonder about how
much how much joy we're feeling or how
how much our emotions are coming back
fluidly wrapping around into love and
you know that notice the difference
between between that and you know
artificially going towards feeling joy
to feel that we've done the process yeah
so you're mentioning like three things
in there that are important the first
one is if you're trying to get rid of
the emotions and you're not loving them
if you're not loving them then they're
not fluid
so if you notice that you're trying to
get over an emotion just the act of
trying to be done with an emotion or get
over an emotion
will send you backwards in the process
so it's literally the emotions are
invited like children in your house like
oh good my kids are home like it's like
when that's the feeling when I can't
wait to feel sad when I can't wait to
feel angry when I can't wait to feel
scared
that's that's when they're you're not
faking it right and even if you're
baking it but it actually works I mean
like I mean if you can fake it enough to
go I actually want to feel angry when it
comes up and you and the anger comes up
and you're like cool I want to do this
then great fake it but it's as long as
you're doing anything to get rid of the
emotions then you know it there's a
seeming Paradox here which is oh if I
love my emotions and I let them move as
they want to without hurting anybody or
manipulating anybody and I love them and
I welcome them they change
and so it looks like I've managed my
emotions really well right but at the
moment that I'm doing it to manage my
emotions it doesn't work yeah it's an
amazing little thing yeah it's like the
idea of letting your emotions in with a
with the agenda of
things changing because they're coming
in I'm imagining you know you're
preparing the house for all your
emotions your kids to to come in and
have a party and so you're preparing the
house and then one by one the kids start
showing up and you're like oh welcome
let's put you to work over there and
like continue preparing for the party
and then what you have is just a bunch
of you know a bunch of your guests
preparing for the guests to show up and
you're not actually having a party
exactly yeah exactly
so yeah that's that was one of the
things that you that you touched on that
like struck a chord with me is that
you're not doing the work if you're if
you are at all
um not welcoming not excited to feel the
emotions and and with that part of what
happens is each you start to notice that
each of the emotions have
a message they have a wisdom right the
anger is a deep form of care it shows us
when we have a boundary that has been
crossed
um it shows us when we're not taking
care of ourselves it shows us what we
want to be determined for in our lives
because we care so deeply about it
fear has a way of telling us that there
are ways that we're not asking for what
we want that we are most likely taking
care of other people rather than putting
on our own oxygen mask first this is
like often there is fear or that we've
been taught that it's another thing that
can tell us that we're very excited that
fear can actually tell us that we're
excited and we're not allowing ourselves
to feel that excitement
and sadness shows like it is like the
the other side of Joy right it's like
sadness shows us that
there's a change that wants to happen or
has happened it it shows us that we love
and that we're in joy around things and
it's an amazing thing to think about why
anybody would avoid heartbreak like that
kind of sadness and grief because it
shows us how much we cared about
something and that the transition is
happening
but the stories that we tell about them
are completely different when if we
haven't allowed ourselves to be sad
then the the story is sadness will last
forever and if we haven't allowed
ourselves to be angry the story is that
anger will destroy everything and if we
haven't allowed ourselves to be fear
this story is if we allow the fear
then we are going to be crippled by it
and we'll never be able to get anything
done and obviously when we do the when
we feel those things none of that
happens right right it's almost uh the
self-fulfilling prophecy is that if we
if we fear that these emotions will last
forever and we don't allow ourselves to
feel them then they're actually lasting
forever because they're stuck in our
body and we are feeling them and you
have to dissociate more and more to to
continue the illusion that you're not
presently feeling them yes and that just
reinforces every every time you go there
every time you go into it it's like okay
see look it's still here
and you end up kind of retreating into a
trap
of your own making beautifully said and
then the weird thing is there's actually
a little bit of Truth to like our we're
we sense something when we think those
things
and we don't have the full picture so
we're describing it awkwardly but as an
example is like
if you allow anger to fully move through
you
then there is a way it destroys
everything particularly yourself meaning
being angry at people when it's
repressed is a way that you create
separation between you and other people
and when anger is fluid and you see that
it's not about them or you and there's
no stories and it's not personal it's
just something that moves through you
then life becomes impersonal and
therefore you are less that
distinguished
hard-edged human you're actually now
this thing that you can see your
relationship to all things you can see
the unity of yourself with everything
and so there is a destruction of you in
there to some degree and everything in
there it's just not the way that you
think anger is going to destroy
everything right right and it's this and
it's the same thing with
sadness and fear like that that fear
makes us less capable and there's a way
that that's true in the fact that if you
fully allow your fear
you're less capable to move
from like an individual will and you
become more and more capable of
being moved by something greater than
yourself right that it feels like you're
being breathed instead of breathing
and maybe it's just a felt sense
difference because you still crazy stuff
happens in the world you do amazing
things but the feeling is that
the gifts are moving through you that
they're not yours and the more you feel
that fear in a weird way you are less
capable so as an example as examples of
that but it's not the way we think it's
going to happen yeah and again it seems
like feeling the emotion is actually the
grounding force that grounds us into the
reality that's already the case you know
if you if you're in a codependent
relationship and you're avoiding your
anger and it's repressed then the fear
is actually that the relationship will
be destroyed but in reality the
connection already is being destroyed
right and the facade of the relationship
that is holding holding the thing
together that makes you think that it's
still together that might actually fall
apart if you draw a boundary that might
be destroyed but you're only grounding
into what's Real by feeling the emotion
right that's right that's beautifully
sad so we're gonna we're gonna be
starting this uh this series talking
about anger we've got two two parts of
an episode coming up for that and I'm
really excited to get into this yeah
that'll be fun yeah that'll be fun yeah
get right into it that's the yeah
societally angry the most reviled
emotion it's an interesting thing to
think about as we we let everybody go is
like how emotions are unacceptable in
our society and I'll just give you the
example is you think about
somebody at a cafe sitting by themselves
having an emotional experience I
remember something like this happened to
me so there's somebody sitting by
themselves getting angry somebody's
sitting by themselves being sad
somebody's sitting by themselves being
scared somebody sitting by themselves
laughing hysterically somebody's sitting
by themselves just like an absolute
Bliss and the question is
which of these is most crazy right you
can just it's the the stigma of emotion
is so apparent when you think about
somebody having these experiences in a
cafe by themselves you can think about
how kinky emotions are societally just
thinking about that beautiful cool thank
you Joe yeah you're welcome thanks Brett
it was a pleasure
thanks for listening to the art of
accomplishment if you enjoyed what you
heard today please subscribe and rate US
on your podcast app we'd love your
feedback so feel free to send us
questions or comments you can reach out
to us join our newsletter or check out
our courses at Art of accomplishment.com
foreign